From New York Times, I'm Michael
Barbaro. This is The Daily. [music]
>> [music]
>> On Wednesday, the Supreme Court dealt
what may be a final blow to the landmark
[music]
Voting Rights Act in a ruling that will
supercharge [music] the already partisan
battle to control the country's election
maps.
Today, Adam Liptak on the legal logic
[music] of the ruling and Nick
Corasaniti on how the decision will
reshape American democracy.
>> [music]
[music]
>> It's Thursday,
>> [music]
>> April 30th.
Adam, this
was a very big ruling on a very big
piece of our history. Yeah, the Supreme
Court did further and in a sense final
damage to the Voting Rights Act of 1965.
Probably the greatest legislative
achievement of the Civil Rights
Movement.
Which was meant to protect minority
voting power.
So, it's meant to stop Southern
officials
from using all kinds of methods from
violence to poll taxes
to literacy tests
to grandfather clauses
to keep individual black voters from the
voting booth. But, it also meant to
ensure that minority voters as a group
had the collective power or at least the
opportunity to elect candidates of their
choice. Right. At the time, President
Johnson called it a triumph for freedom.
That's right and it worked. Voter
registration and voter turnout numbers
in Southern states
went from single digits for minority
voters
to sometimes achieving levels higher
than those of white voters.
>> Mhm.
But, this gave rise to an attack from
the right and from Republicans because,
you know, frankly, protecting minority
voters often meant protecting Democratic
voters because there's a
high degree of correlation between the
two.
So, tell us how that pressure from the
right brings us to yesterday's ruling.
So, in response to challenges from
conservatives, the Supreme Court on
Wednesday issued the third
in a trilogy of decisions
that have collectively hollowed out and
rendered the Voting Rights Act
toothless.
The first one in 2013
cut the heart out of the Voting Rights
Act, which had required jurisdictions
with a history of discrimination to get
federal approval before they changed
voting practices.
The second one in 2021
made it all but impossible to sue under
the Voting Rights Act for so-called vote
denial claims.
Claims that election administrators had
made it harder to vote by say
instituting voter ID.
And then this third and last decision on
Wednesday took aim at the remaining
piece of the Voting Rights Act. Which
tried to protect minority voting power
when it would be diluted so that
minority voters
could not have the opportunity to elect
candidates of their choice.
>> [music]
>> Just remind us of the specifics of the
case that was decided on Wednesday, this
third in this trilogy, and what
specifically was at issue in it?
So, the question in the case was whether
Louisiana could have two majority
minority voting districts. Louisiana has
six congressional districts.
And not long ago, the state redrew its
maps.
So, that black voters were the majority
in two districts rather than just one.
Louisiana is about a third black. So, if
you just do the math, two sounds about
right. Mhm. But, the court said that
taking account of race in that way was
unlawful. Creating a second
congressional district in which black
voters were the majority, the court
found, was unlawful. That's right. So,
in the past, the Voting Rights Act would
have protected these districts because
the understanding of Voting Rights Act
for decades and decades
was that it was meant not only to make
sure that an individual voter would have
the right to vote, but that this
community of voters, that minority
voters as a collective
would have the opportunity to elect
their candidates of choice.
>> Mhm. But, on Wednesday, by a 6-3 vote,
the court's Republican appointees in the
majority, the Democratic appointees in
dissent the court installed a new test.
One that made it very hard to take race
into account in drawing voting
districts. And what was that new test?
So, the court says the Voting Rights Act
only kicks in
if lawmakers had intended to
discriminate against minority voters.
Whatever the effect of, whatever the
results of the map are.
Only intentional racial discrimination,
which is very hard to prove
what was in the lawmakers' heads counts.
So, what the court does on Wednesday is
it lays out a new legal criteria
for when it is not okay to eliminate a,
for example, black majority
congressional district. Which the VRA in
the past was seen as protecting. And
that new criteria is that the people
eliminating the district would have to
stand up on a stage somewhere pretty
much and say, "We're getting rid of this
district in order to hurt black voters."
They'd have to be explicit in their
desire to discriminate. And unless they
do that then such a district with a
black majority can be wiped off the map.
That's right.
So, a lawmaker could say, and maybe
truthfully say, that hey, "I don't mean
to discriminate against black people. I
mean to discriminate against Democrats
and I'm allowed to do that."
>> Partisan gerrymandering, the Supreme
Court said in another case
is not subject to review in the federal
courts. Mhm. And what this means as a
practical matter
is that districts drawn to ensure that
minority voters have the power to elect
the candidates they want are now in
peril across the country.
Adam, what is the rationale from the
conservative justices who issued this
ruling
for doing so? Because it feels related
to a larger body of Supreme Court
rulings that we've talked to you about
over the last several years from the
Roberts Court, including of course the
affirmative action ruling, that have
challenged government intervention
when it comes to race.
So, as a general matter, quite right,
Michael.
Uh this court, the conservative majority
on this court
is uniformly hostile to government
decision-making that takes account of
race. It says the Constitution is
colorblind.
And you shouldn't be sorting people
based on their race.
And then more specifically in the
context of the Voting Rights Act
the majority says that things have
changed. The Voting Rights Act had a
role to play back then.
But, no longer.
And Justice Alito says as much in his
majority opinion.
He says, "At the time of the Act's
passage, the nation had faced nearly a
century of entrenched racial
discrimination in voting."
An insidious and pervasive evil.
Which had been perpetuated in certain
parts of our country through unremitting
and ingenious defiance of the
Constitution.
But, the Voting Rights Act led to great
strides in the ensuing decades.
Voting tests were abolished. Disparities
in voting registration and turnout due
to race were erased.
And African Americans attained political
office in record numbers.
>> Mhm. And that account of history
suggested to him that this law has done
its job. But, the job having been done,
we no longer need it.
Famously, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg in
2013 responding to this same kind of
argument
said
that may be so
but you don't throw away your umbrella
just because you're not getting wet.
And her suggestion was
that it was because the Voting Rights
Act was still in place
that these gains could be sustained.
Mhm.
And that perhaps without it they might
begin to erode. Correct.
Adam, in skimming some of the majority's
opinion, I skim, you actually read
Alito seemed to take some pains to
suggest that this ruling is narrow and
that it is not striking down the Voting
Rights Act. Which colleagues of ours
have always said was a possibility
in this case. What do you make of that
insistence by the conservative majority
that this was in the end a smallish
ruling?
Well, Justice Alito says
that they're not abandoning their
precedents in this area.
That we need only update the framework.
Mhm. So, that it reflects important
historical developments.
Justice Elena Kagan in dissent on behalf
of herself
and the two other Democratic appointees,
Justices Sotomayor and Jackson
has a completely different view.
She wrote that the Voting Rights Act
was, quote, "born of the literal blood
of Union soldiers and civil rights
marchers.
It ushered in awe-inspiring change,
bringing this nation closer to
fulfilling the ideals of democracy and
racial equality.
And it has been repeatedly
and overwhelmingly
reauthorized by the people's
representatives in Congress.
Only they have the right to say it is no
longer needed, not the members of this
court.
I dissent then from this latest chapter
in the majority's now completed
demolition of the Voting Rights Act."
Mhm. So, you have these two competing
viewpoints. Maybe each of them is
overstating things to a point.
But as between the two of them, I would
think that Justice Kagan
has the better of the argument.
>> Because? Uh the history in this area is
these three decisions now. The first two
were quite consequential, and the second
one in particular basically shut down a
way to try to challenge restrictions on
voting by minority voters.
>> Mhm.
So, it stands to reason
that this latest installment in the
court's
deconstruction of the Voting Rights Act
will have a considerable impact
in the short-term in the election we're
about to face, and certainly in years to
come.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Adam, thank you very much. Thank you,
Michael.
After the break,
my colleague Nick Corasaniti on what the
impact of this ruling will look like on
American politics.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Nick, welcome back to The Daily. Uh
thanks for having me.
We now quite clearly understand from
Adam Liptak that because of the Supreme
Court ruling, the Voting Rights Act's
protection of minority election
districts across the country has been
deeply weakened.
And you've spent years reporting on the
question of voting rights and
gerrymandering.
And you've been anticipating this ruling
because we are in the middle of a fierce
nationwide redistricting battle already.
So,
when the rubber of this ruling meets the
road, in your estimation, what are going
to be the practical implications of it
starting right now in this election
year? I think one thing that's clear is
that this is starting a new chapter in
what has become a a national
redistricting arms race. You know, the
guardrails that were once there that
kept legislators in check are now even
fewer.
And so, when we pivot to what that might
look like to the midterms, the picture's
a little muddy, but we can break it down
by a few states. The first would be
Louisiana.
They're most directly impacted by this
decision, and their map was struck down.
>> Right. But that doesn't mean immediately
that there will be one or two new
Republican districts. It's up to the
legislature and the governor there to
begin that process. And they have a very
short window. And just explain that, why
do they have a short window?
So, early voting in Louisiana is
scheduled to happen this weekend. And
that's a critical moment because what
that means is voters are casting ballots
now for candidates in the existing
districts. So, it would be a high bar to
clear to toss out those votes, redraw
the districts, restart the process when
voters have already started to
participate in the upcoming primary
election. Because you'd effectively be
tossing out legally cast votes.
Got it. So, in Louisiana,
the Republican-controlled legislature,
which of course draws the political
maps, is seeing this ruling as a
rationale to move very quickly before
this year's congressional midterms to
make the state more Republican-friendly
for congressional races.
Exactly. It could be one to two
districts to to wipe out all Democrats
there. But we just don't know until they
take that formal step. Got it. So,
that's Louisiana.
Yes.
And [music] there is a handful of other
states that are in a similar position,
at least within the primary calendar.
>> [music]
>> And they're mostly found in the South,
and they had these districts that were
at least somewhat protected by the
provision in the Voting Rights Act that
the Supreme Court ruled on today.
[music] Mhm. And those, looking just at
the calendar, include South Carolina,
Missouri, and [music] Tennessee.
Now, it's unclear whether there's the
political will or desire to [music] do
it immediately in those states.
But let's look at Tennessee to start.
There, Republicans have been loud today,
including Senator Marsha Blackburn,
who's also running for governor, in
calling for the state to dismantle its
remaining Democratic district ahead of
the midterm elections. Right. I saw her
on social media. She's basically saying,
"Let's finish the job of turning
Tennessee 100%
red Republican. There will only be a
structure in place for Republicans to
win
House seats here."
Exactly. Now, they would be in a pretty
tight sprint, but with some dramatic
action in the state legislature and
support of the current governor, they
would be able to redraw their maps ahead
of the midterms. And describe the seat
that would be wiped out if Senator
Blackburn got her way in Tennessee.
So, this district in the southwestern
part of the state is the lone Democratic
district in Tennessee. It encompasses
Memphis and is a majority-minority
district with roughly 60% of a black
voting-age population and a major black
population city like Memphis in there.
So, if Republicans were to take a
ruthless gerrymander to that city,
they'd be splitting apart these black
voters into a number of other Republican
districts. Got it. A pretty big
undertaking. Yeah, and there's also the
cartographical challenge to use the
multi-syllable word there, where
>> [laughter]
>> when a district is in the corner of a
state, it's a lot harder to carve up
than if it were in the middle and you
could split it apart like a piece of
pie. So, there are both calendar
challenges, geographical challenges, and
time challenges in Tennessee. Right.
>> But Republicans also have a very
immediate use of this ruling when it
comes to new maps in the midterms, and
that's in Florida.
Now, earlier this week, Governor Ron
DeSantis introduced a new map, and it's
in a very aggressive gerrymander. It
would eliminate four of the eight
Democratic districts currently in the
state. Half, wow. Yeah, it it's a it's a
significant redrawing of the state's
political divisions. Now, in justifying
drawing new maps, Governor DeSantis had
pointed to this looming decision before
the court as a reason that the state
needed to redraw its maps ahead of the
midterms. Mhm. He anticipated that the
ruling would go essentially Republicans'
way. Exactly. And so, today, Republicans
in the state legislature passed these
new maps.
>> Wow. And while it's likely that they
will see a legal challenge from
Democrats, they now have a new decision
from the Supreme Court to point to in
their legal battle to ensure that these
four new Republican-leaning districts
are indeed in place for the midterms.
Right. And if anyone in Florida was
inclined to try to legally challenge
these new maps based on the Voting
Rights Act, they are probably feeling
pretty discouraged based on the Supreme
Court ruling. The message basically is
that so long as no one is explicitly
saying these new maps are intended to
discriminate against minorities,
this gerrymandering will be perfectly
legal.
Exactly right, at least on the federal
level. So, when we put this all
together,
what do we expect new maps
in a place like Florida, in Louisiana,
perhaps in a couple of other places, I
know we can't be certain that will
happen. What is it likely to mean for
the overall math of which party will
have structural advantages from
gerrymandering in this midterm cycle, if
it's possible to say?
There will be a
slight, but established Republican tilt
to the maps heading into November. And
that's in part due to the decision
today, and it's also in part due to just
the now nearly year-long attempt to draw
new maps in states across the country.
Mhm. But it it's certainly not the
multi-seat cushion, you know, in the
double digits that President Trump and
his advisers had envisioned when they
started this fight in Texas last year.
Right. It's not enough to counter what
maybe polling suggests at the moment are
some serious political challenges for
Republicans, whether it's the war in
Iran, rising gas prices, and the
president's general unpopularity. Yes,
exactly.
At the beginning of our conversation,
Nick, you said that this ruling is
likely to further the already intense
arms race over gerrymandering by both
parties. And I recall that our colleague
Nate Cohn said that if the Supreme Court
ended up more or less gutting the Voting
Rights Act, which
it seems they have started to really do
in this ruling, that it over time could
eliminate something like a dozen House
seats from Democratic control and ensure
that they're in Republican hands. So,
taking Nate at face value, he's a smart
guy,
let's talk about how we expect Democrats
to respond to this because Democrats
have become very aggressive and pretty
nimble at countering Republican
gerrymandering in places like California
and now Virginia. And I'm seeing that
there are already calls for Democrats to
take this moment, seize it, and turn
some of their
states entirely blue. What do you
expect?
So, for the immediate, for the 2026
midterms, Democrats have have played
their hand. They've redrawn in Virginia
and in California, and they got a boost
by courts in Utah. Mhm. But I think the
clearest political outcome of today's
decision is that these redistricting
wars that started in the middle of the
decade, you know, which is very rare,
are going to spiral into 2028, and
they're going to expand.
Already, Democrats in New York and
Colorado have begun to explore the
process of redrawing their maps ahead of
2028. And today, Governor Hochul
indicated, "I'm going to continue on
that." Mhm. Other states, like Illinois
and Maryland,
Democrats have complete control over the
map-drawing process. They've already
drawn pretty aggressive gerrymanders,
but given today's ruling and the
aggressively hyper-partisan nature of
these battles over maps, they could go
even further.
Maryland Democrats could try again to
eliminate the final Republican seat in
that state.
And Democrats in Illinois could
effectively split apart or spread across
Chicago voters and eliminate every
Republican in that state. Now, that
would be a pretty wacky-looking map with
a lot of spaghetti strings, but
[laughter] it's in the realm of
possibility. And today, Governor
Pritzker indicated that he might
entertain this. And he simply said, "We
have options."
So, what this is most likely to unleash
over time is a very brazen form of
gerrymandering in which, if you happen
to not be in the political majority in
your state,
you are likely to
find your political power
totally neutered.
Yeah, we could see a place where
everyone rushes to the extreme. But
Nick, just to return to the Voting
Rights Act as we finish this
conversation, the law that was weakened
by the Supreme Court with Wednesday's
ruling, one thing we know, as we are
speculating about lots of things we
don't quite know, is that almost for
sure this ruling will result in fewer
congressional districts having a
majority of black voters than that. And
as somebody who's studied voting rights
and gerrymandering as long as you have,
what is it going to mean for black
political power in this country to be
diluted in that way?
I mean, I think we can look at what's
already been done, right? Like just
[clears throat] look at this past year
and the national redistricting wars.
There have been numerous black members
of Congress who have seen their seats
drawn away in Texas and in Missouri and
in North Carolina.
And so, seeing how that's already
happened when the guardrails were on,
you could see how quickly this could
spiral when they've been taken off.
>> [snorts]
>> Right, we've spent most of this
conversation talking about how this
could impact Congress.
But today's ruling could impact state
legislative lines and county lines. This
ruling also creates an opportunity for
state lawmakers to redraw their own
districts or local city and municipal
districts to try and gain a partisan
edge, right? It's still about power, but
in doing so, they would be decimating
some of these black-majority districts.
And those local races are important
because it it creates a pipeline of
lower elected officials, lower black
elected officials getting an opportunity
to eventually climb the political ladder
and eventually end up in Congress.
Right, so there will, in general, be
less black
leadership in government.
Well, there there could be, but there's
a flip side to this, and that's
[clears throat] the blue states. So,
there is a possibility that these
Democratic states create new districts,
new Democratic districts that are
represented by black members of
Congress.
And it's also, I think, critical to
remember that the black voting power
within the Democratic Party is still
really strong. They hold a outsize
impact in the presidential nominating
process. They're a core block in the
Democratic base when it comes to general
elections. So, their voice can't be
erased as long as there's a two-party
system. So, at the end of the day, race
and partisanship are just inextricably
linked when it comes to how
everyone will respond to this
ruling.
Exactly.
>> [music]
>> We're in a hyper-partisan,
hyper-polarized,
>> [music]
>> give-no-inch era.
And everything is about gaining an
advantage [music]
so that your party can hold on to power.
So, the national redistricting wars, the
battles over voting rights,
what's been underpinning all of that
>> [music]
>> is a desire and a goal of pure partisan
power.
So, it's hard to see this decision
>> [music]
>> and what it's going to do to American
politics outside of that context.
>> [music]
>> Nick,
thank you very much.
Thanks for having me.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
[music]
This war of choice is a political and
economic disaster at every level.
>> [music]
>> The president has got himself and
America stuck in the quagmire of another
war in the Middle [music] East. In his
first appearance before Congress since
the start of the war against Iran,
Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth assailed
those in Congress [music]
who have questioned the Trump
administration's strategy. The way you
stain the [music] troops
when you tell them 2 months in, 2 months
in, Congress. And you should know
better. Shame [music] on you.
Calling this a quagmire 2 months in,
handing propaganda to our [music]
enemies, shame on you for that
statement.
During the hearing, an aide to Hegseth
acknowledged for the first time the full
financial cost of the war,
putting it at [music] $25 billion.
And After my term as chair ends on May
15, I will continue to serve as a
governor for a period of time
to be determined.
On Wednesday, [music]
the chairman of the Federal Reserve,
Jerome Powell, said he [music] would
remain on the Central Bank's board even
after his time as its leader ends,
a departure from tradition that he said
was necessary to protect [music]
the Fed against legal attacks from the
president.
One of those [music] attacks has been a
criminal investigation into the Fed's
renovation of its headquarters,
>> [music]
>> an investigation that the Trump
administration suspended last week.
But Powell said that [music] the
investigation left him no choice but to
stay on the board until it was fully
[music] and transparently resolved. I
worry that these attacks are battering
the institution and putting at risk the
thing that [music] really matters to the
public, which is the ability to conduct
monetary policy without taking into
consideration political factors.
Today's episode [music] was produced by
Alex Stern and Jessica Chung.
It was edited by Devon Taylor, Rob
Zipko, [music] and Liz O'Brien with help
from Michael Benoist.
Contains [music] music by Rowan Nicks,
Dan Powell, and Marion Lozano. Our theme
music is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley.
>> [music]
>> That's [music] it for The Daily.
I'm Michael Barbaro.
See you tomorrow.